# Phylogenomic analysis 

## About 
This repository houses the details of my bioinformatic pipeline for my phylogenetic analyses of megalocytiviruses, a group of fish pathogens exotic to Australia, and other members of the family *Iridoviridae*. A set of core genes are first identified followed by phylogenetic analysis of the core genes. 

Go to the file 'setup.md' in this repository, for information about how to set-up a conda environment. The same file houses information on how to complete basic tasks like transfering files and fixing errors you might receive while completeing this analysis.

## Part one: re-annotation and quality check
Part one is where we quality check and re-annotate genomes for input into Part two: core gene analysis. 

### Create a directory for this work
```bash
mkdir mcv
cd mcv
```

### Save genomes to mcv directory
Download 'genomes_1' folder and its contents from this repository and save the folder and contents to the mcv directory. This folder contains 35 megalocytivirus and 10 iridoviridae genomes in FASTA format. Details about each genome can be found in the taxonomy.csv file in this repository.

#### Which genomes are included and exluded from the genomes_1 directory?
I included all megalocytivirus genomes saved as 'complete' genomes under the genus *Megalocytivirus* in the NCBI GenBank the Taxonomy Browser, which were the expected length. This included genomes entered into NCBI Genbank as ‘unclassified’ at the species level. One megalocytivirus genome was not included given it was smaller than the expected length (accession KC138895I). 

I also included ten representative genomes from each of the six other iridovirid genera including two genomes from each genus where multiple genomes are available (two each from of the genera *Ranavirus*, *Lymphocystivirus*, *Iridovirus*, and *Chloriridovirus*; one each from of the genera *Decapodiridovirus* and *Daphniairidovirus*). 

These genomes were chosen to span the deepest node of the given clade shown in Zhao et al. (2022) except for the genus *Lymphocystivirus*. One of the lymphocystivirus genomes initally chosen for inclusion, L63545, was half the expected length. I replaced L63545 with another genome from the same genus (KX643370) which was the expected length. 

### Run Prokka on genomes
```bash
bash script_one_prokka.sh
```

### Save proteome files to a central folder.
Collect the proteome files from the prokka_outputs_1 directory and save them to proteome_1 directory. This step is done in preparation for running OrthoFinder, a program which uses the proteome files as inputs.
```bash
bash script_two_collect_proteome_files.sh
```

### Run OrthoFinder
OrthoFinder is a program which identifies genes highly conserved between genomes. I manually check and edit (where necessary) the prokka-assigned annotations.

We run this program later in the analysis to identify a final set of 'core genes' at the species, genus and family level. Right now, we're just running it to identify a set of highly conserved genes to target for checking and editing (as explained a bit later on). 

#### Nominate values for OrthoFinder options
Open 'script_three_orthofinder.sh' and nominate values for options -t (-t number_of_threads) and -a (-a number_of_orthofinder_threads). These options control the parallelisation of OrthoFinder to decrease the runtime. For -t, choose the  number of cores on your computer. For -a, put 1/4 of the value of -t. 

This script will take the proteome files from the directory 'proteome_1' and store the output files in a directory using the naming convention Results_MONTHDAY. This folder will be saved in a directory called 'orthofinder_1'. 

Run updated script.
```bash
bash script_three_orthofinder.sh
```

### Manually check and edit annotations 
Computers are great but they're not perfect. This is why, in theis pipeline, I manually curate the prokka-assigned annotations using Geneious Prime. I recorded all changes i made in the spreadsheet 'Manual Check_Nucleotide alignment Annotations' in the 'prokka_outputs_1' directory in this repository.

#### Steps to follow
1. Export the .gff file generated by prokka and drag and drop it into Geneious Prime (Version 2020.2.5).
2. Pairwise align the file with the .gb (Genbank Full) file in GenBank, for the same genome.
3. Check each annotation and decide to either keep it as-is or edit it.
4. Create a directory proteome_2.
5. Save all the manually curated proteome files for all genomes as .faa files into the proteome_2 directory.

##### How did I make decisions? 
I compared the prokka-annotated genome with the reference genome, and made decisions as to wheather to keep the prokka-annotations 'as-is', or edit them, based on whether the prokka annotations matched the annotations in the reference genome. Where the annotations did not match, I reviewed both options and decided on the best annotation to keep based on:
* A BLASTp search of annotations on the the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank Database. I favoured annotations with a higher number of matches, % identity to matches, and % query cover.
* I also checked whether stop codons were present in the annotation. If a 'favoured annotation' (as described above) had ≤5 stop codons I kept the annotation and removed the stop codons. Yet if a 'favoured annotation' had >5 stop codons I kept the less-favoured annotation (if there was one). If the annotation had >5 stop codons and there was no 'favored annotation' (i.e. there was no alternative annotation option in the .gff file or .gb file) I deleted the annotation all together. 

###### Megalocytivirus genomes
I completed this process for one genome from each megalocytivirus genotype and species, as well as for every one of the megalocytivirus 'Unclassified' genomes (genomes entered into NCBI GenBank Taxonomy Browser under the genus 'megalocytivirus' as 'Unclassified'). 

For the megalocytivirus genomes for which i did not complete this process, I transferred the manually curated annotations with 85% similarity from the relevant genotype. I did this using the 'Annotate From' option in the'Live Annotate and Predict tab' in Geneious Prime (Version 2020.2.5). I then manually curated the transfered annotations checking for stop codons following the same decision-making process as described above. 

Listed below are the genotypes i transferred annotations from (in **bold**), and beneathe them, the genomes the annotations from that genotype were tranferred to. 

**Scale drop disease virus**

**OM037668**
* MN562489 
* MT521409 

**Infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus**

**AF371960** 
* MK689685 
* MN432490 
* MT926123 
* MT986830 
* OP009387 

**Red sea bream iridovirus**

**MK689686**
* AY894343 
* BD143114 
* KC244182 
* KT804738 
* MK098187 
* MK098185 
* MK098186 
* MW139932 
* OK042108 
* OK042109 
* ON075463 
* ON740976 
* ON743042 
* OL774653 
* OL774654 
* OL774655 
* MT798582 

 **Turbot reddish bodied iridovirus** 

 **GQ273492**
*  None (only one complete genome).

###### Iridoviridae genomes
For every iridoviridae genome from genera other than *Megalocytivirus*, I completed the manual curation process as described above, but only for a small set of highly conserved genes. This was done to save time. The genes I chose to manually curate were identified through the OrthoFinder run above. For each of these genomes, I manually curated the genes assigned to orthogroups containing orthologs from 100% of genomes part of the analysis. 

The genes I chose for manual curation for each genome, was based on different OrthoFinder runs. The results for each OrthoFinder run can be found in the directory 'orthofinder_1'. The OrthoFinder run, from which the set of highly conserved genes were chosen for manual curation, is provided for each genome in the file 'Manual Check_Nucleotide alignment Annotation' in this repository.



## References
Zhao, R., Gu, C., Zou, X., Zhao, M., Xiao, W., He, M., He, L., Yang, Q., Geng, Y., & Yu, Z. (2022). Comparative genomic analysis reveals new evidence of genus boundary for family Iridoviridae and explores qualified hallmark genes. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal, 20, 3493–3502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2022.06.049
